====================BSL-1.0====================
 * Distributed under the Boost Software License, Version 1.0.
 *    (See accompanying file LICENSE_1_0.txt or copy at
 *          https://boost.org/LICENSE_1_0.txt)


====================BSL-1.0====================
Boost Software License - Version 1.0 - August 17th, 2003

Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person or organization
obtaining a copy of the software and accompanying documentation covered by
this license (the "Software") to use, reproduce, display, distribute,
execute, and transmit the Software, and to prepare derivative works of the
Software, and to permit third-parties to whom the Software is furnished to
do so, all subject to the following:

The copyright notices in the Software and this entire statement, including
the above license grant, this restriction and the following disclaimer,
must be included in all copies of the Software, in whole or in part, and
all derivative works of the Software, unless such copies or derivative
works are solely in the form of machine-executable object code generated by
a source language processor.

THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR
IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY,
FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE, TITLE AND NON-INFRINGEMENT. IN NO EVENT
SHALL THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS OR ANYONE DISTRIBUTING THE SOFTWARE BE LIABLE
FOR ANY DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE,
ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER
DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.

====================BSL-1.0====================
The code is made available under the [Boost License 1.0](https://boost.org/LICENSE_1_0.txt).


====================BSL-1.0====================
[![License](https://img.shields.io/badge/License-Boost%201.0-lightblue.svg)](https://www.boost.org/LICENSE_1_0.txt)


====================COPYRIGHT====================
    Copyright (c) 2015 Orson Peters


====================COPYRIGHT====================
/*          Copyright Andrei Alexandrescu, 2016-,
 * Distributed under the Boost Software License, Version 1.0.
 *    (See accompanying file LICENSE_1_0.txt or copy at


====================COPYRIGHT====================
/*          Copyright Andrei Alexandrescu, 2016-.
 * Distributed under the Boost Software License, Version 1.0.
 *    (See accompanying file LICENSE_1_0.txt or copy at


====================COPYRIGHT====================
/*          Copyright Danila Kutenin, 2020-.
 * Distributed under the Boost Software License, Version 1.0.
 *    (See accompanying file LICENSE_1_0.txt or copy at


====================File: LICENSE_1_0.txt====================
Boost Software License - Version 1.0 - August 17th, 2003

Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person or organization
obtaining a copy of the software and accompanying documentation covered by
this license (the "Software") to use, reproduce, display, distribute,
execute, and transmit the Software, and to prepare derivative works of the
Software, and to permit third-parties to whom the Software is furnished to
do so, all subject to the following:

The copyright notices in the Software and this entire statement, including
the above license grant, this restriction and the following disclaimer,
must be included in all copies of the Software, in whole or in part, and
all derivative works of the Software, unless such copies or derivative
works are solely in the form of machine-executable object code generated by
a source language processor.

THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR
IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY,
FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE, TITLE AND NON-INFRINGEMENT. IN NO EVENT
SHALL THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS OR ANYONE DISTRIBUTING THE SOFTWARE BE LIABLE
FOR ANY DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE,
ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER
DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.


====================MIT====================
| Library             | License                                                                                          |
|---------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| pdqsort             | [MIT](https://github.com/orlp/pdqsort/blob/47a46767d76fc852284eaa083e4b7034ee6e2559/license.txt) |


====================Zlib====================
    This software is provided 'as-is', without any express or implied warranty.
   In no event will the authors be held liable for any damages arising from the
   use of this software.

    Permission is granted to anyone to use this software for any purpose,
   including commercial applications, and to alter it and redistribute it
   freely, subject to the following restrictions:

    1. The origin of this software must not be misrepresented; you must not
   claim that you wrote the original software. If you use this software in a
   product, an acknowledgment in the product documentation would be appreciated
   but is not required.

    2. Altered source versions must be plainly marked as such, and must not be
   misrepresented as being the original software.

    3. This notice may not be removed or altered from any source distribution.
