====================BSD-4-Clause-UC====================
 * Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
 * modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
 * are met:
 * 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
 *    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
 * 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
 *    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
 *    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
 * 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this software
 *    must display the following acknowledgement:
 *	This product includes software developed by the University of
 *	California, Berkeley and its contributors.
 * 4. Neither the name of the University nor the names of its contributors
 *    may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software
 *    without specific prior written permission.
 *
 * THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE REGENTS AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
 * ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
 * IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
 * ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE REGENTS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
 * FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
 * DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
 * OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
 * HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
 * LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
 * OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
 * SUCH DAMAGE.


====================COPYRIGHT====================
 * Copyright (c) 1987, 1993
 *	The Regents of the University of California.  All rights reserved.


====================COPYRIGHT====================
 * Copyright (c) 1998-2003 Carnegie Mellon University.  All rights reserved.


====================COPYRIGHT====================
 * Copyright (c) 1998-2004 Carnegie Mellon University.  All rights reserved.


====================COPYRIGHT====================
 * Copyright (c) 1998-2016 Carnegie Mellon University.  All rights reserved.


====================COPYRIGHT====================
 * Copyright (c) 2009-2016 Carnegie Mellon University.  All rights reserved.


====================COPYRIGHT====================
/* Copyright (C) 1991-2, RSA Data Security, Inc. Created 1991. All
rights reserved.


====================COPYRIGHT====================
Copyright 1999-2003 The OpenLDAP Foundation, Redwood City, California, USA.

====================Cmu-Computing-Services====================
 * 3. The name "Carnegie Mellon University" must not be used to
 *    endorse or promote products derived from this software without
 *    prior written permission. For permission or any other legal


====================Cmu-Computing-Services====================
 * 3. The name "Carnegie Mellon University" must not be used to
 *    endorse or promote products derived from this software without
 *    prior written permission. For permission or any other legal
 *    details, please contact  
 *      Carnegie Mellon University
 *      Center for Technology Transfer and Enterprise Creation
 *      4615 Forbes Avenue
 *      Suite 302
 *      Pittsburgh, PA  15213
 *      (412) 268-7393, fax: (412) 268-7395
 *      innovation@andrew.cmu.edu
 *
 * 4. Redistributions of any form whatsoever must retain the following
 *    acknowledgment:
 *    "This product includes software developed by Computing Services
 *     at Carnegie Mellon University (http://www.cmu.edu/computing/)."
 *
 * CARNEGIE MELLON UNIVERSITY DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES WITH REGARD TO
 * THIS SOFTWARE, INCLUDING ALL IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY
 * AND FITNESS, IN NO EVENT SHALL CARNEGIE MELLON UNIVERSITY BE LIABLE
 * FOR ANY SPECIAL, INDIRECT OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OR ANY DAMAGES
 * WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS, WHETHER IN
 * AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, NEGLIGENCE OR OTHER TORTIOUS ACTION, ARISING
 * OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR PERFORMANCE OF THIS SOFTWARE.


====================Cmu-Computing-Services====================
 * Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
 * modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
 * are met:
 *
 * 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
 *    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer. 
 *
 * 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
 *    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in
 *    the documentation and/or other materials provided with the
 *    distribution.
 *
 * 3. The name "Carnegie Mellon University" must not be used to


====================Cmu-Computing-Services====================
 * Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
 * modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
 * are met:
 *
 * 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
 *    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer. 
 *
 * 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
 *    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in
 *    the documentation and/or other materials provided with the
 *    distribution.
 *
 * 3. The name "Carnegie Mellon University" must not be used to
 *    endorse or promote products derived from this software without
 *    prior written permission. For permission or any other legal
 *    details, please contact  
 *      Office of Technology Transfer
 *      Carnegie Mellon University
 *      5000 Forbes Avenue
 *      Pittsburgh, PA  15213-3890
 *      (412) 268-4387, fax: (412) 268-7395
 *      tech-transfer@andrew.cmu.edu
 *
 * 4. Redistributions of any form whatsoever must retain the following
 *    acknowledgment:
 *    "This product includes software developed by Computing Services
 *     at Carnegie Mellon University (http://www.cmu.edu/computing/)."
 *
 * CARNEGIE MELLON UNIVERSITY DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES WITH REGARD TO
 * THIS SOFTWARE, INCLUDING ALL IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY
 * AND FITNESS, IN NO EVENT SHALL CARNEGIE MELLON UNIVERSITY BE LIABLE
 * FOR ANY SPECIAL, INDIRECT OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OR ANY DAMAGES
 * WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS, WHETHER IN
 * AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, NEGLIGENCE OR OTHER TORTIOUS ACTION, ARISING
 * OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR PERFORMANCE OF THIS SOFTWARE.


====================IBM-pibs====================
 *  COPYRIGHTS: 
 *             This module contains code made available by IBM 
 *             Corporation on an AS IS basis.  Any one receiving the 
 *             module is considered to be licensed under IBM copyrights 
 *             to use the IBM-provided source code in any way he or she 
 *             deems fit, including copying it, compiling it, modifying 
 *             it, and redistributing it, with or without 
 *             modifications.  No license under any IBM patents or 
 *             patent applications is to be implied from this copyright 
 *             license. 
 * 
 *             A user of the module should understand that IBM cannot 
 *             provide technical support for the module and will not be 
 *             responsible for any consequences of use of the program. 


====================LicenseRef-scancode-paul-mackerras-binary====================
 * Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
 * modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
 * are met:
 *
 * 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
 *    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer. 
 *
 * 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
 *    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in
 *    the documentation and/or other materials provided with the
 *    distribution.
 *
 * 3. The name "Carnegie Mellon University" must not be used to
 *    endorse or promote products derived from this software without
 *    prior written permission. For permission or any other legal
 *    details, please contact  
 *      Carnegie Mellon University
 *      Center for Technology Transfer and Enterprise Creation
 *      4615 Forbes Avenue
 *      Suite 302
 *      Pittsburgh, PA  15213
 *      (412) 268-7393, fax: (412) 268-7395
 *      innovation@andrew.cmu.edu
 *
 * 4. Redistributions of any form whatsoever must retain the following
 *    acknowledgment:
 *    "This product includes software developed by Computing Services
 *     at Carnegie Mellon University (http://www.cmu.edu/computing/)."
 *
 * CARNEGIE MELLON UNIVERSITY DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES WITH REGARD TO
 * THIS SOFTWARE, INCLUDING ALL IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY
 * AND FITNESS, IN NO EVENT SHALL CARNEGIE MELLON UNIVERSITY BE LIABLE
 * FOR ANY SPECIAL, INDIRECT OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OR ANY DAMAGES
 * WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS, WHETHER IN
 * AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, NEGLIGENCE OR OTHER TORTIOUS ACTION, ARISING
 * OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR PERFORMANCE OF THIS SOFTWARE.


====================RSA-MD====================
License to copy and use this software is granted provided that it
is identified as the "RSA Data Security, Inc. MD5 Message-Digest
Algorithm" in all material mentioning or referencing this software
or this function.

License is also granted to make and use derivative works provided
that such works are identified as "derived from the RSA Data
Security, Inc. MD5 Message-Digest Algorithm" in all material
mentioning or referencing the derived work.

RSA Data Security, Inc. makes no representations concerning either
the merchantability of this software or the suitability of this
software for any particular purpose. It is provided "as is"
without express or implied warranty of any kind.

These notices must be retained in any copies of any part of this
documentation and/or software.


====================RSA-MD====================
License to copy and use this software is granted provided that it
is identified as the "RSA Data Security, Inc. MD5 Message-Digest
Algorithm" in all material mentioning or referencing this software
or this function.

License is also granted to make and use derivative works provided
that such works are identified as "derived from the RSA Data
Security, Inc. MD5 Message-Digest Algorithm" in all material
mentioning or referencing the derived work.

RSA Data Security, Inc. makes no representations concerning either
the merchantability of this software or the suitability of this
software for any particular purpose. It is provided "as is"
without express or implied warranty of any kind.
These notices must be retained in any copies of any part of this
documentation and/or software.
