YDB License Agreement

THIS IS AN AGREEMENT BETWEEN YOU AND YANDEX LLC (WITH ITS AFFILIATES,
"YANDEX") THAT GOVERNS YOUR USE OF THE YDB SOFTWARE (TOGETHER WITH
ANY UPDATES AND ENHANCEMENTS TO IT, AND ACCOMPANYING DOCUMENTATION, THE
“SOFTWARE”) THAT YANDEX MAKES AVAILABLE TO YOU. IF YOU INSTALL OR USE THE
SOFTWARE, YOU WILL BE BOUND BY THIS LICENSE AGREEMENT.

1. Use of the Software
Yandex hereby grants you a personal, limited, nonexclusive, non-transferable,
non-sublicenseable license to (a) install the Software on computer equipment
owned or controlled by you and (b) use the Software solely (i) for your internal
business purposes in any public cloud. Some components of the Software (whether
developed by Yandex or third parties) may also be governed by applicable
open-source software licenses located in the software component's source code.
Your license rights with respect to these individual components are defined by
the applicable open-source software license, and nothing in this License
Agreement will restrict, limit, or otherwise affect any rights or obligations
you may have, or conditions to which you may be subject, under such open source
software licenses.

2. Limitations
You may not, and you will not encourage, assist or authorize any other person
to, (a) incorporate any portion of it into your own programs or compile any
portion of it in combination with your own programs; or (b) sell, rent, lease,
lend, loan, distribute, act as a service bureau, provide the Software as a
stand-alone hosted solution for others to use, publicly communicate, transform,
or sub-license the Software or otherwise assign any rights to the Software in
whole or in part; (c) modify, alter, tamper with, repair, or otherwise create
derivative works of the Software, or (d) reverse engineer, disassemble, or
decompile the Software or apply any other process or procedure to derive the
source code of any software included in the Software. All rights granted to you
are conditioned on your continued compliance with this License Agreement, and
will immediately and automatically terminate if you do not comply with any term
or condition of this License Agreement or the Terms of Use of Yandex.Cloud
Platform Service posted at https://yandex.ru/legal/cloud_termsofuse/.

3. Reservation of Rights
You may not use the Software for any illegal purpose. The Software is the
intellectual property of Yandex or its licensors. The structure, organization,
and code of the Software are valuable trade secrets and confidential information
of Yandex. The Software is protected by law, including without limitation
copyright laws and international treaty provisions. Except for the rights
explicitly granted to you in this License Agreement, all right, title and
interest in the Software are reserved and retained by Yandex and Yandex’s
licensors. You do not acquire any intellectual property or other rights in the
Software as a result of downloading the Software.

4. Updates
In order to keep the Software up-to-date, we may offer automatic or manual
updates at any time. If we elect to provide maintenance or support of any kind,
we may terminate that maintenance or support at any time without notice to you.

5. Termination
You may terminate this License Agreement at any time by uninstalling or
destroying all copies of the Software that are in your possession or control.
Your rights under this License Agreement will automatically terminate without
notice from Yandex if you fail to comply with any of its terms. In the case of
termination, you must cease all use and destroy all copies of the Software.
Yandex may modify, suspend, discontinue, or terminate your right to use part or
all of the Software at any time without notice to you, and in that event Yandex
may modify the Software to make it inoperable. Yandex will not be liable to you
should it exercise those rights. Yandex’s failure to insist upon or enforce your
strict compliance with this License Agreement will not constitute a waiver of
any of Yandex’s rights.

6. Disclaimer of Warranties and Limitation of Liability
a. YOU EXPRESSLY ACKNOWLEDGE AND AGREE THAT INSTALLATION AND USE OF, AND ANY
OTHER ACCESS TO, THE SOFTWARE IS AT YOUR SOLE RISK. THE SOFTWARE IS DELIVERED TO
YOU “AS IS” WITH ALL FAULTS AND WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, AND YANDEX, ITS
LICENSORS AND DISTRIBUTORS, AND EACH OF THEIR RESPECTIVE AFFILIATES AND
SUPPLIERS (COLLECTIVELY, THE “RELEASED PARTIES”) DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES,
EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING WITHOUT LIMITATION THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE, ACCURACY, QUIET ENJOYMENT,
AND NON-INFRINGEMENT. NO ORAL OR WRITTEN INFORMATION OR ADVICE GIVEN BY A
RELEASED PARTY OR AN AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE OF A RELEASED PARTY WILL CREATE A
WARRANTY. THE LAWS OF CERTAIN JURISDICTIONS DO NOT ALLOW THE DISCLAIMER OF
IMPLIED WARRANTIES. IF THESE LAWS APPLY TO YOU, SOME OR ALL OF THE ABOVE
DISCLAIMERS, EXCLUSIONS, OR LIMITATIONS MAY NOT APPLY TO YOU, AND YOU MAY HAVE
ADDITIONAL RIGHTS.
b. TO THE EXTENT NOT PROHIBITED BY LAW, NO RELEASED PARTY WILL BE LIABLE TO YOU
FOR ANY INCIDENTAL OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES FOR BREACH OF ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED
WARRANTY, BREACH OF CONTRACT, NEGLIGENCE, STRICT LIABILITY, OR ANY OTHER LEGAL
THEORY RELATED TO THE SOFTWARE, INCLUDING WITHOUT LIMITATION ANY DAMAGES ARISING
OUT OF LOSS OF PROFITS, REVENUE, DATA, OR USE OF THE SOFTWARE, EVEN IF A
RELEASED PARTY HAS BEEN ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGES. IN ANY CASE,
ANY RELEASED PARTY’S AGGREGATE LIABILITY UNDER THE AGREEMENT WILL BE LIMITED TO
$50.00. THE LAWS OF CERTAIN JURISDICTIONS DO NOT ALLOW THE EXCLUSION OR
LIMITATION OF INCIDENTAL OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES. IF THESE LAWS APPLY TO YOU,
SOME OR ALL OF THE ABOVE EXCLUSIONS OR LIMITATIONS MAY NOT APPLY TO YOU, AND YOU
MAY HAVE ADDITIONAL RIGHTS.

7. Indemnification
You are liable for and will defend, indemnify, and hold harmless the Released
Parties and their officers, directors, agents, and employees, from and against
any liability, loss, damage, cost, or expense (including reasonable attorneys’
fees) arising out of your use of the Software, violation of the License
Agreement, violation of applicable law, or violation of any right of any person
or entity, including without limitation intellectual property rights.

8. Amendment
We may amend this License Agreement at our sole discretion by posting the
revised terms on the Yandex’s website (https://cloud.yandex.ru/) or within the
Software. Your continued use of the Software after any amendment's effective
date evidences your agreement to be bound by it.

9. Conflicts
The terms of this License Agreement govern the Software and any updates or
upgrades to the Software that we may provide that replace or supplement the
original Software, unless the update or upgrade is accompanied by a separate
license, in which case the terms of that license will govern.

NOTE
Other license terms may apply to certain, identified software files contained
within or distributed with the accompanying software if such terms are included
in the file named “Third_Party_Licenses” that accompanies the Software. Such
other license terms will then apply in lieu of the terms of the software license
above.

