## Changes in types

Added linear types.

## Changes in built-in functions

* Added functions `WithSideEffects`/`WithSideEffectsMode` for working with side effects.
* Added functions for creating new dictionaries based on existing ones with content modification: `DictInsert`/`DictUpsert`/`DictUpdate`/`DictRemove`.
* Added functions for working with mutable dictionaries using linear types.
* Added `Block` function for executing a block of code using anonymous dependent nodes.
* Added `ToDynamicLinear`/`FromDynamicLinear` functions for converting between linear types.
* Added `LinearType`/`DynamicLinearType` functions for constructing linear types. * Added the `LinearTypeHandle`/`DynamicLinearTypeHandle` functions for constructing linear types during code generation.
* Added the `LinearItemType` function for retrieving the parameter type from a linear type.
* Added `Concat` function for string concatenation.
* Added `NullIf` function.

## Changes in NOT NULL expression

* The expression `x NOT NULL` will generate an error instead of a warning. To fix this, replace it with `x IS NOT NULL`.

## PRAGMA changes

Added the `SimplePg` PRAGMA, which allows importing all functions from the `SimplePg` module into the global scope.

## Added the SimplePg module {#simple-pg-module}

* Added the `now`, `to_date`, `round`, `date_trunc`, `floor`, `ceil`, `to_char`, and `date_part` functions.
* Functions accessible through the `SimplePg` or `Pg` modules now generate an extended error message when used in the global scope.
