# 2021 articles

## Serverless alternative to traditional databases {#2021-smi-serverless}

{% include notitle [overview_tag](../_includes/tags.md#overview) %}

! [Serverless alternative to traditional databases](_assets/2021/serverless.png =yfmvar-0-yfmvarend)

A modern distributed DBMS must be able to support various types of workloads, meeting the needs of completely different users. {{ ydb-name }} DBMS allows not only storing petabytes of data, supporting processing of millions of queries per second, but also provides a serverless computing mode. This platform makes it possible to serve projects with different workload types: key-value, traditional web applications based on a relational database, as well as document-oriented databases.

The [article](https://habr.com/ru/post/562746/) covers:

* History of {{ ydb-name }}.
* {{ ydb-name }} from the user's perspective.
* Architecture of {{ ydb-name }}.
* Serverless mode in {{ ydb-name }}.

## Diving into Serverless. The birth of {{ ydb-name }} {#2021-smi-inner-serverless}

{% include notitle [database_internals_tag](../_includes/tags.md#database_internals) %}

! [Diving into Serverless](_assets/2021/inner-serverless.png =yfmvar-1-yfmvarend)

Continuation of the conversation with developers of the Serverless services ecosystem. At the beginning of our journey, Gleb Borisov described the situation with Yandex Cloud Functions, then Danil Osherov immersed us in the world of the S3 protocol and the Object Storage service. In this [article](https://habr.com/ru/post/552032/), [{{ team.fomichev.name }}]({{ team.fomichev.profile }})({{ team.fomichev.position }}) shared details about NewSQL.

## Yandex's multi-tenant approach to building data infrastructure {#2021-smi-multiarend}

{% include notitle [overview_tag](../_includes/tags.md#overview) %}

@ [YouTube](https://youtu.be/35Q2338ywEw)

The days when a separate computer was allocated for a database instance are long gone. Now managed solutions are everywhere, running the necessary processes in virtual machines. An even more advanced approach is used for computing — 'serverless computing', for example AWS Lambda or Yandex Cloud Functions. And serverless databases are at the very cutting edge of progress.

In the [article](https://habr.com/ru/company/yandex/blog/564854/), [{{ team.fomichev.name }}]({{ team.fomichev.profile }})({{ team.fomichev.position }}) talked about serverless solutions that became popular in Yandex even before the general hype and are still used for storing and processing data.

## Cooking with serverless. Voice service for doctor appointments and clinic registration {#2021-smi-serverless-cook}

{% include notitle [use_cases_tag](../_includes/tags.md#use_cases) %}

! [Cooking with serverless](_assets/2021/serverless-cook.png =yfmvar-4-yfmvarend)

What serverless stack is needed, what does the scenario consist of, and how can a CRM system be arranged on the Yandex Cloud side? The Voximplant communication platform and Yandex Cloud have prepared a recipe for a voice service for registration and appointment booking at a clinic. However, it can also be used for other similar serverless tasks.

In the [article](https://habr.com/ru/post/547970/):

* Structure of the Voximplant Kit visual designer.
* Analysis of the incoming call scenario.
* Structure of the CRM system on the Yandex side via API.
* Creating Yandex Database Serverless in Yandex Cloud.

## Serverless alternative to traditional databases {#2021-smi-serverless-alternative}

{% include notitle [overview_tag](../_includes/tags.md#overview) %}

! [Serverless alternative to traditional databases](%E2%9F%A6S1%E2%9F%A7)

Serverless computing has become the next step in reducing the 'tax' on infrastructure that cloud service users are forced to pay, but today there are few databases on the market for this ecosystem, and the task of {{ ydb-name }} is to fill this gap.

In the [article](https://www.osp.ru/os/2021/01/13055826):

* History of the development of distributed databases.
* About Yandex Database.
* Architecture of YDB.
* Serverless mode in YDB.
* YDB from the user's perspective.
